add first draft of file formats article (#16)
JaneliaSciComp/JaneliaDataStandards: posts/file_formats_introduction.qmd

### Scalability

Scalability is closely related to ease of use. A scalable format is easy to use... at scale. Scalability encompasses storing, viewing, and sharing gigantic images.

Historically, images were limited to non-chunked or 'monolithic' file formats. In these formats, an image is stored as a linear string of bytes in one file. If you want to view even just a piece of your image that is stored in this format, then the entire 2D image must be loaded from your computer’s disk into memory.

The scalability of monolithic formats may be improved by storing multiple copies of the same 2D image at different resolutions in the same file. This type of file is often referred to as a 'multiscale pyramid'. The different resolutions are generated through a technique called downsampling, in which data are typically either uniformly discarded, or in which subsets of pixels are averaged to produce a new, smaller image. Storing an image as a multiscale pyramid means that the software needs to only load into memory the lowest-resolution plane that is needed. However, even though it is a smaller plane, the entire plane must still be loaded into memory.

> Another technique for improved scalability is chunking. Chunking involves breaking up an image into chunks. The images can be any number of dimensions, so it's easier to think of these data as n-dimensional arrays rather than 2D grids of pixels. The arrays can be broken up into uniform but otherwise arbitrary chunk sizes. The groups of chunks may be organized as a hierarchy of nested directories on a file system. The metadata, which are usually in a dedicated file, contain information describing the layout of the chunks. Chunked formats can store more complex images than non-chunked formats, and can be viewed more efficiently, because software can retrieve small chunks of data as needed. Chunking and multiscale pyramids are not mutually exclusive; many file formats recommend both. 

Reviewer: We should motivate the need for chunks.

```suggestion
Another technique for improved scalability is chunking. Chunking involves breaking up an image into local regions called chunks. The images can be any number of dimensions, so it's easier to think of these data as n-dimensional arrays rather than 2D grids of pixels. The arrays can be broken up into uniform, but otherwise arbitrary chunk sizes that reflect the dimensionality of the array. A large 3D volume can be divided into small subvolumes. The groups of chunks may be organized as a hierarchy of nested directories on a file system or web service, making it easy to locate the desired chunk. The metadata, which are usually in a dedicated file, contain information describing the layout of the chunks. Chunked formats can store more complex images than non-chunked formats and can be viewed more efficiently because software can retrieve small chunks of data as needed. Chunking and multiscale pyramids are not mutually exclusive; many file formats recommend both. 
```

Author: I incorporated this, with one tiny modification: "can be divided into small subvolumes, **for example**".

Many scientists find themselves with image data that are too large to share easily, so they make the data available upon request, often via shipping a hard drive. For the busy scientist who doesn't have time to learn about chunked formats, databases, or object stores, or whose data aren't a great fit for existing repositories such as the [Image Data Resource](https://idr.openmicroscopy.org/), [EMPIAR](https://www.ebi.ac.uk/empiar/), the [DANDI Archive](https://dandiarchive.org/), or the [AWS Open Data](https://registry.opendata.aws/) registry, shipping hard drives is a reasonable option. However, it is not as FAIR as making the data accessible on the web. In the future, we are likely to see more big-data repositories based on chunked formats stored in the cloud.

# Microscopy File Formats

Below, we present an opinionated overview of some of the most common microscopy file formats.
 
## Ultra base file formats

### Binary

> We use the term 'binary format' to refer to file formats that defy classification into more standardized categories. Most of the file formats described in other sections are, at least in part, binary in the sense that they have text-encoded and unencoded components (e.g. metadata files and chunk files, respectively). By 'binary formats', we mean standardized arrangements of bits and bytes in a single file, custom-designed for specific applications. Two examples of binary formats we use at Janelia are DAT ([Chris Barnes' DAT toolkit](https://github.com/clbarnes/jeiss-convert), [Janelia's DAT toolkit](https://github.com/janelia-cellmap/fibsem-tools)) and [Keller Lab Block (KLB)](https://doi.org/10.1038/nprot.2015.111) ([bitbucket repository](https://bitbucket.org/fernandoamat/keller-lab-block-filetype/src/master/)). These formats are not derived from any broader standard and can only be interpreted by dedicated software specifically written for them. Binary formats can be useful at acquisition, especially in live cell imaging or in fluorescence imaging, where speed is paramount. They may also provide storage solutions, for example by allowing for the use of completely novel compression schemes. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We use the term 'binary format' as a generic term to refer to file formats that can be easily read by computers. If files defy classification into more standardized categories, they may be only referred to as "binary". Most of the file formats described in other sections are, at least in part, binary in the sense that they have text-encoded and non-text components (e.g. metadata files and chunk files, respectively). By 'binary formats', we mean prescribed arrangements of bytes in a single file designed for specific applications.

Two examples of binary formats we use at Janelia are Enhancded FIBSEM DAT ([Chris Barnes' DAT toolkit](https://github.com/clbarnes/jeiss-convert), [Janelia's DAT toolkit](https://github.com/janelia-cellmap/fibsem-tools)) and [Keller Lab Block (KLB)](https://doi.org/10.1038/nprot.2015.111) ([bitbucket repository](https://bitbucket.org/fernandoamat/keller-lab-block-filetype/src/master/)). These formats are not derived from any broader standard and can only be interpreted by dedicated software specifically written for them.

Binary formats can be useful at acquisition, especially in live cell imaging or in fluorescence imaging, where speed is paramount. They may also provide storage solutions, for example, by allowing for the use of completely novel compression schemes. 
```

> In our experience, these formats are usually not very FAIR. Often, they are only maintained by a handful of people who designed the format for a special use case. The Keller Lab has made significant efforts to enhance the interoperability of KLB by providing converters for platforms like ImageJ, MATLAB, and some proprietary libraries. While these efforts improve accessibility, we still recommend against publishing data in these specialized formats.

Reviewer: We are confusing the generic term binary with the inability to further classify some formats. KLB and DAT should probably be discussed later.

Author: I changed the header to Binary/Hard to classify... I'm open to other suggestions

 
## Ultra base file formats

### Binary/Hard to classify

We use the term 'binary format' as a generic term to refer to file formats that can be easily read by computers. If files defy classification into more standardized categories, they may be only referred to as "binary". Most of the file formats described in other sections are, at least in part, binary in the sense that they have text-encoded and non-text components (e.g. metadata files and chunk files, respectively). By 'binary formats', we mean prescribed arrangements of bytes in a single file designed for specific applications.

Two examples of binary formats we use at Janelia are Enhancded FIBSEM DAT ([Chris Barnes' DAT toolkit](https://github.com/clbarnes/jeiss-convert), [Janelia's DAT toolkit](https://github.com/janelia-cellmap/fibsem-tools)) and [Keller Lab Block (KLB)](https://doi.org/10.1038/nprot.2015.111) ([bitbucket repository](https://bitbucket.org/fernandoamat/keller-lab-block-filetype/src/master/)). These formats are not derived from any broader standard and can only be interpreted by dedicated software specifically written for them.

> Binary formats can be useful at acquisition, especially in live cell imaging or in fluorescence imaging, where speed is paramount. They may also provide storage solutions, for example, by allowing for the use of completely novel compression schemes. 

Author: I added a paragraph at the bottom of the "Scalability" section. Perhaps it could be improved with some examples of lossy and lossless algorithms commonly used in bioimaging? I'm not sure which ones to highlight. I'm thinking one sentence or less.

In microscopy, the two main text formats are XML and JSON, discussed below. Another example worth mentioning is RDF (Resource Description Framework), which, although not strictly a text format, is often represented as text. RDF enables more descriptive relationships beyond simple key-value pairs, making it a powerful tool for modeling semantic data.

For small amounts of data, storing the data as structured text is convenient. However, for large amounts of data, say, megabytes, text formats become unwieldy. This is why, in microscopy, text formats are usually reserved for metadata, while the image data themselves are stored in more space-efficient formats.

## Base file formats

> 

Reviewer 2: Would be nice to have a short sentence here emphasizing that we're not covering everything, and how / why we chose what to discuss.  Something similar to what's at the start of the General-purpose file formats section.

> Next we summary some formats that are commonly-used in bio-imaging that we find noteworthy.  They  will cover a wide variety of use cases, but is not exhaustive - some applications might benefit from a format not listed here.

Author: Done!

Because Zarr is such a new project, there are some limits to its ease of use. If you are using it for a highly novel, specialized scientific application, you may encounter issues with missing features or incomplete standardization. For example, the existing compression schemes may be inadequate, or it may not support complex transformations. Still, there are perhaps a dozen scientific image viewers that support [OME-Zarr](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00418-023-02209-1), which bodes well for its future.

### n5

> TODO (John B.)

Reviewer 2: see https://github.com/JaneliaSciComp/JaneliaDataStandards/pull/17

The OME data model supports a wide range of metadata, including image characteristics (e.g., resolution, number of focal planes, time points, and channels), as well as details about the acquisition instrument, experimenters, experimental design, and more. Any software that can read TIFF files can also open OME-TIFFs. Additionally, most scientific image viewers are equipped to interpret at least the core metadata of OME-TIFF, making this format broadly interoperable. Since OME-TIFFs are TIFFs, they can store multiple image planes, but they also lack chunking capabilities.

If you choose to save your data as a TIFF, it's best practice to use the OME-TIFF specification. OME-TIFF can accommodate more of your metadata than a standard TIFF, which lacks microscopy-specific fields. Even if you don't currently need all the metadata contained in the OME-XML, users analyzing or processing your data in the future may benefit from having access to this additional information. In contrast, custom metadata schemas or plain text notes won't be supported by existing tools.

### OME-NGFF

> Like OME-TIFF, OME-NGFF is a specification of a more generic file format that is tailored for microscopy. OME-NGFF is, for the time being, synonymous with OME-Zarr; 'NGFF' stands for 'Next Generation File Format'. An OME-NGFF data set consists of a Zarr hierarchy, which includes certain metadata files in standard locations in JSON format. OME-NGFF is much newer than OME-TIFF; its first release was in 2021 ([Moore et al. 2023](https://doi.org/10.1007/s00418-023-02209-1)). It supports some types of ancillary data, namely regions of interest (ROIs) and label images (e.g. from image segmentation). 

Reviewer 2: > regions of interest (ROIs)

I'd remove this, because some people (like me) think of ROIs as points / lines / rectangles, which it doesn't support.  We can add "high-content screening" data though, so maybe end with:

>  It supports some types of structured and ancillary data, namely high-content screening (HCS) and label images (e.g. from image segmentation).

Author: Done!

Adopting BIDS can help your data to integrate seamlessly with BIDS-compatible tools or repositories, such as the [DANDI Archive](https://www.dandiarchive.org/), which encourages the use of BIDS for many data types. Even if you do not require BIDS-specific tooling, modeling your Zarr or HDF5 data hierarchies according to BIDS principles can be a sensible approach to organization. However, it is worth noting that the BIDS microscopy standard is still maturing. Learning it takes time, and managing redundant metadata carries risks. For these reasons, we do not currently use BIDS for our microscopy data, though it is a robust and valuable standard, particularly for medical imaging applications.

## Specialty file formats 

These are formats you’re more likely to inherit than select, unless you have a particular reason to. They were created to solve particular problems the other formats couldn’t solve.

### BigDataViewer

> The [BigDataViewer](https://imagej.net/plugins/bdv/) format is based on HDF5 and XML, and is designed for 3D multi-view light sheet microscopy data. As the name suggests, it allows for seamless viewing of terabyte-scale images. It uses both the pyramid and chunking techniques–each dataset is stored as a series of downsampled volumes, and each volume is stored as a chunked array. This allows the lower resolution slices to be rendered almost instantly, and the higher resolution slices to be loaded soon after, if the user continues browsing in the same region.

Reviewer 3: HDF5/N5 and XML is supported as base formats.

Author: Done!

> The BigDataViewer software, which comes with Fiji, can view any file format that is in the [Bio-formats](http://www.openmicroscopy.org/bio-formats/) library using the LOCI Bioformats plugin, but most of those formats don’t readily support large, multiview image datasets such as those from Selective Plane Illumination Microscopy (SPIM) systems. For this type of data, the BigDataViewer format may be a good choice. It integrates well with Fiji’s Multiview Reconstruction plugins, and is more standardized than inventing your own custom HDF5 structure and metadata schema. It is, however, less performant in the cloud than Zarr or N5-based formats.

Reviewer 3: - Light sheet fluorescence microscopy (LSFM) / Selective Plane Illumination Microscopy (SPIM)
- It integrates with Fiji's BigStitcher plugin
- I would remove the last sentence since it is not relevant, N5 is used by default these days
- Also natively supports the Imaris (.ims) file format
-

Author: Done!
